---
title: Aptitude & Maths 
sidebar_label: 8. Aptitude & Maths
sidebar_position: 8
tags: [Aptitude]
---

# Aptitude and Maths
-----

## Number System

  - Any Composite number can be written as the product of its prime factors.
  - 240 = 2<sup>4</sup> * 3<sup>1</sup> * 5<sup>1</sup> = p<sup>x</sup> * q<sup>y</sup> * r<sup>z</sup>
  - Factors of 240 are (2<sup>0</sup>,2<sup>1</sup>,2<sup>2</sup>,2<sup>3</sup>,2<sup>4</sup>)*(3<sup>0</sup>,3<sup>1</sup>)*(5<sup>0</sup>,5<sup>1</sup>).
  - Sum of factors of 240 are (2<sup>0</sup> + 2<sup>1</sup> + 2<sup>2</sup> + 2<sup>3</sup> + 2<sup>4</sup>)*(3<sup>0</sup> + 3<sup>1</sup>)*(5<sup>0</sup> + 5<sup>1</sup>).
  - Total #factors(TF) = `(x+1)*(y+1)*(z+1)` = 5*2*2 = 20
  - Total Number of Even Factors(e) = `(x)*(y+1)*(z+1)` 
  - Total Number of odd Factors = TF - e
  - Product of Factors = n<sup>(TF+1/2)</sup> = 240<sup>(21/2)</sup> = 240<sup>10</sup>.

## HCF/GCD and LCM

  - (a,b) are **Co-Prime** if gcd(a,b) = 1. 
    - used in Calculation of MMI in Number Theory.
  - (a,b) are **Twin-Prime** if a and b are both prime and b-a = 2.
    - used in Calculation of MMI in Number Theory.
  - HCF of two or more fraction
    - HCF of Numerators / LCM of Denominators
  - LCM of two or more fraction
    - LCM of Numerators / HCF of Denominators
  - HCF(a,b) * LCM(a,b) = a*b
    - Product of HCF and LCM is equal to product of Numbers
      - Applicable ONLY for 2 numbers

  - 🌟 IIT Level Notes 🌟
    - 1. HCF and LCM of fractions
      - HCF(a/b, c/d, e/f,...) = HCF(a,c,d)/LCM(b,d,f) = HCM(numerator)/ LCM(denominator)
      - LCM(a/b, c/d, e/f,...) = LCM(a,c,d)/HCF(b,d,f) = LCM(numerator)/ HCF(denominator)
    - 2. HCF of two numbers will always be less than the LCM of them
      - HCF(a,b) < LCM(a,b) ----- Always.
    - 3. Product of two numbers is equal to the product of LCM and HCF of them
      - a*b = HCF(a,b) * LCM(a,b)
      - Ques 1: What is the product of two numbers whose HCF is 25 and LCM is 5.
        - Ans: Not Possible, beacuse HCF > LCM
      - Ques 2: What is the product of two numbers whose HCF is 10 and LCM is 35.
        - Ans: 10*35 = 350
    
    - 4. Remainder Theorem
      - Let P(x) is a Polynomial, and if it is divided by (x-a), then the Remainder = P(a).
        - Ex: find the Remainder when (x<sup>2</sup> + x - 1) is divisible by (x-5).
          - Ans:  P(5) = 25 + 5 - 1 = 29.
    - 5. Factor Theorem
      - If P(x) is divisible by (x-a), then P(a) = 0.
        - In other words, If P(x) is divisible by (x - a), then Remainder = P(a) = 0.
    - Note: when we divide P(x) by f(x), the Remainder will always be of atleast 1 degree less than the f(x) Polynomial.

## 🌟 IIT Level Tips 🌟 

1. underroot("√") is a +ve quantity => √16 = 4. and not ±4.

2. √x^2 = |x| = mod x = ±x

3. √f(x) exist only when f(x) ≥ 0

4. x^2, x^3, x^4, ... are called power functions, and their values are always +ve and can be zero.
  - => x^a ≥ 0. 

5. 2^x, 3^x, 4^x, ... are called exponential functions, and their values are always +ve and can never be zero.
  - => a^x > 0. 

6. If sum of two or more +ve quantities results in zero, that implies all quantities are zero.
  - Ex. Given: √x + |u| + v^2 = 0.
  - => x = 0, u = 0, v = 0  

7. Quadratic Equation
  - ax^2 + bx + c > 0
    - If a  > 0 (uppward parabola) & D < 0 (no real roots)
  - ax^2 + bx + c < 0
    - If a < 0 (Downward parabola) & D < 0 (no real roots)

8. Formula: (a^4 + a^2 + 1) = (a^2 + a + 1)(a^2 - a + 1)

9. Solving Inequalites
  - 1. Factorize the given equation and find all odd powers bracket
  - 2. Get values from bracket and arrange them in number line.
  - 3. Find values of x for which function is not defined (even power bracket or denominator) and remove/take them.
  - 4. Put +ve sign to the rightmost side and then change of sign for odd powers brackets only.
  - 5. chose answer
    - a. For > 0, >=0, opt +ve sign
    - b. For < 0, <=0, opt -ve sign
10. a^3 + b^3 +c^3 - 3abc
  - = (a+b+c)(a^2 + b^2 + c^2 - ab - bc - ac)
  - = (a+b+c)((a-b)^2+(b-c)^2+(c-a)^2)/2

11. Every perfect square number is:
  - 4n or 4n+1
  - 3n or 3n+1
  - 2n(either even) or 2n+1(or odd) 😂

12. If LCM(a,b) = c, then c/a and c/b are both Integers
  - LCM(n!, (n+1)!) = (n+1)!
  - LCM(6,9) = 18
  - LCM(pi, pi^2) = Not possible, because if you think answer is pi^2, then pi^2/pi and pi^2/pi^2 should have been both Integers, but they are not.
  - LCM(√3, √6) = Not possible, same reason

## Ratio and Proportion

- **Ratio** is a:b or a/b
- **Compound Ratio** 
  - If a/b and c/d are two ratio then (ac)/(bd) is Compound ratio.
- **Proportion** 
  - if a/b and c/d are two ratio and they are like a/b = c/d then, both ratio are said to be in proportion.
  - written as a:b :: c:d, where b and c are means & a and d are extremes.
  - Product of means = Product of extremes.
- **Continued-Proportion**
  - If a,b,c are in continued-proop. then a:b :: b:c => b^2 = ac
  - => any three consecutive terms of a GP are in continued Proportion.

- 🌟 IIT Level Notes 🌟
  - **C & D**
    - If(a/b) = c/d --- (1)
    - then a/b + 1 = c/d + 1 is called Compendendo
    - then a/b - 1 = c/d - 1 is called Dividendo
    - and doing both is caled C and D.
  - If a/b = c/d = e/f = ... ---(2)
  - expresion (2) = any linear Combination of Numerators / any linear Combination of Denominators
  - Example a/b = c/d = e/f = (2a + 3c + 5e)/ (2b + 3d + 5f)
  - Example a/b = c/d = e/f = [(a^(1/n) + c^(1/n) + e^(1/n))/ (b^(1/n) + d^(1/n) + f^(1/n))]^n
  - proof: express (2) = k and put values to validate (k-Method)

## Logarithms

- If loga b = x, then
- required 3 Conditions should hold: a>0, a!=1, b>0
- If b=0, loga b = loga 0, = -∞ (if a>1, let a=2, then 2^(-∞) = 0) = Not defined. 
- If b=0, loga b = loga 0, = ∞ (if a<1, let a=0.5, then (0.5)^(∞) = 0) = Not defined. 
- If a=1,b=1, loga b = log1 1, = R(many answers) = Not defined.
  - logcot45 tan45 = Not defined as base cannot be 1.
- Properties of log(may not be known to you)
  - Smile/muskan Theroem: loga b^c = logc b^a, if you draw the curve line b/w swapped elements, you will see a smile. 
  - a^x = e^(xlna)
  - loga b^c = c*loga b  
  - loga^c b = (1/c)(loga b) = base ki power 1 upon ho jayegi.  
- Logarithms of negative numbers is not defined. See the log graph.
- Properties
  - log 1(base a) = 0 for all a > 0 and a != 1
  - log a(base a) = 1 for all a > 0 and a != 1
- Number of digits in a number can be found by taking the log base 10 of that number. 
  - floor(log99(base 10) + 1)  = 2. 
  - floor(log100(base 10) + 1) = 3. 
- **VVVI Imp**:
  - In loga b,
  - If both a and b are on same side of unity, then answer is +ve, else -ve
  - Ex - log(2) (4) = +ve = 2 
  - Ex - log(2) (.4) = -ve = log2 (4/10) = log2 4 - log2 10 = 2 - 3.something = -ve
  - Ex - log(.2) (4) =  -ve = log(2/10) 4 = log2 4/log2 (2/10) = log2 4/(log2 2 - log2 10) = Denom is negative, num is +ve = -ve
  - Ex - log(.2) (.4) =  +ve 
  - In other words
    - If loga b > 0 
      - => a>1 and b>1 
      - or =>  0<a<1 and 0<b<1
    - If loga b < 0 
      - => a > 1 and 0 < b < 1 
      - or =>  0 < a < 1 and b > 1

## Progression

  - 🌟 IIT Level Notes 🌟
    - **AP**  
      - last term = a + (#terms-1)*d
      - => number of terms(n) in AP = (l-a)/d + 1
      - Tn means nth term
      - Tn = a + (n - 1)d = a+nd-d 
        - => Tn is a linear function
        - => coefficient of n is d.
      - Arithmatic Mean = (a+b)/2
      - 😈😈 Inserting Arithmetic Means between numbers
        - Let a & b are two numbers and we want to insert n means b/w them
        - Total Numbers in the end will be n + 2.
        - Let means be Arithmatic means. since these n+2 numbers must form an AP with first term as a and last being b.
        - last term  = a + (#terms-1)*d
        - b = a + (n + 1)*d 
        - d = (b-a)/(n+1)
        - => first term = a
        - => second term (1st AM) = a+d = a + (b-a)/(n+1)
        - => third term (2st AM) = a+2d = a + 2*(b-a)/(n+1)
        - and so on...
    - **GP**
      - Geometric Mean = sqrt(ab)
      - 😈😈 Inserting Geometric Means between numbers
        - Let a & b are two numbers and we want to insert n means b/w them
        - Total Numbers in the end will be n + 2.
        - Let means be Geometric means. since these n+2 numbers must form an GP with first term as a and last being b.
        - last term  = ar^(#terms-1)
        - b = ar^(n + 1) 
        - r = (b/a)^(1/(n+1))
        - => first term = a
        - => second term (1st GM) = ar = a(b/a)^(1/(n+1))
        - => third term (2st GM) = ar^2 = a((b/a)^(1/(n+1)))^2
        - and so on...
    - **HP**
      - There is no general formulas for HP. THey are found by inverting the numbers and then using AP formulas.

    - 😈😈 Relation b/w AM,GM,HM
      - GM is the Geometric mean of AM and HM
        - 😈 GM = sqrt(AM*HM)
      - For any two numbers a &b
        - 😈 AM > GM > HM (Trick: Lexiographically decreasing)
    - **AGP**


## Time and Distance 

  - Relative Speed
    - If two cars are moving toward/away each other(opposite directions). Relative speed = S1+S2
    - If two cars are moving in same direction(). Relative speed = |S1-S2|

  - Trains
    - case 1: Train crossing stationary object, and has no length
      - s(train) = l(train length) / time  
    - case 2: Train crossing stationary object, and has length
      - s(train) = l+o(train length + object length) / time  
    - case 3: Train crossing moving object, and has no length
      - case 3a: Same direction.
        - |s(train) - s(object)| = l(train length) / time  
      - case 3a: opposite direction.
        - s(train) + s(object) = l(train length) / time  
    - case 4: Train crossing moving object, and has length
      - case 3a: Same direction.
        - |s(train) - s(object)| = l+o(train length + object length) / time  
      - case 3a: opposite direction.
        - s(train) + s(object) = l+o(train length + object length) / time

    - Conclusion : lengths(train and object) will always be added. 
      - All cases combined is covered in case 4. just put length or speed of object 0 to get other cases.

  - Boats and Stream
    - upstream :- Boat Moving opposite to the direction of stream. => speed of boat will decrease.
      - Boat relative Speed : s(boat) - s(stream)
    - downstream :- Boat Moving with stream => speed of boat will increase.
      - Boat relative Speed : s(boat) + s(stream)

## Time and Work

  - Time is always told in hr,sec,min.
  - Work is always told as `efficiency` => How much thing is done in this much time.
  
## Data Interpretation

  - bar graph
  - line graph
  - histogram
  - polygon graph
  - tabular form
  - pie chart

## Deductive Logic Problems
  - Deriving a conclusion from a single/multiple propositions called premises.


## Functions

### Quotes by Shaurya for Shaurya

- Complete the thing that you wanted to complete in the first place because you may not get a second chance to do it again/from start.
